So good morning.
Thank you for coming to Power Management.
My name is Ethan Bold.
I'm on the CoreOS I/O Kit team,
and I work on sleep/wake.
And I'm going to talk to you about
power management features and
Mountain Lion that you should know about.
And then after that, my coworker,
Soren Spies, is going to come up,
and he's going to tell you about some
energy-efficient coding practices
that you can use in OS X and in iOS.
So let's talk about Mountain Lion.
I'm going to talk to you
about three things today.
The first, power assertions.
Power assertions are an API that your
app can use to tell OS X when you
need the system to stay powered on.
I'm going to talk about dark wake.
That's a new system power state
between asleep and fully awake.
And then we're going to look at
some debugging tools that will help
you understand what's going on in
your system with power assertions.
Power assertions and sleep
and wake and dark wake.
So let's jump in and talk
about power assertions.
Power assertions allow your app to
specify when you're doing user-requested
work that you want to complete.
You can take a power assertion
to prevent idle sleep.
That is, to keep the computer awake and
prevent it from idle sleeping while
you're holding this assertion.
You can take a power assertion
to prevent idle display sleep.
That is, to keep the display on as long
as you're holding this assertion.
Power assertions are hints
or suggestions to OS X.
We can't guarantee that OS X will
honor all power assertions.
There's always things like
the user closing of the lid,
running out of battery,
or overheating that will cause the
system to have to sleep anyway,
even if you're holding a power assertion.
Not everyone should use power assertions.
There's a few good reasons not to.
You shouldn't use them if the user
isn't expecting your work to complete.
If your work is resumable and
the user is not waiting for it,
then the system can fall asleep
and wake up again and your
work can resume after that.
[Transcript missing]
This is going to create our assertion.
There's a couple of other APIs similar to
this one that you can find in the header.
First argument to assertion create
with name is the assertion type.
We're passing type prevent
user idle system sleep.
We're passing an initial level,
K-I-O-P-M assertion level on.
I won't talk about it here,
but there are some APIs you can use in
this header to toggle the level of an
assertion from on to off and off to on.
You could do that if you wanted to
create one assertion and reuse it.
But you can check those out for yourself.
Next up, we're going to pass a
descriptive name for this power
assertion that we're creating.
Here I chose to name the assertion
"Processing Giant Files." I might
be a video editing app that
needs to edit 4 gigs of data,
which could take minutes to complete,
and I want that work to finish.
So by calling it "Processing
Giant Files," I let power users
and admins and other developers
and me know exactly why I'm
holding this power assertion.
And finally, the API returns an assertion
ID in the argument newAssertion.
When this function completes,
I'm holding a brand new power assertion.
I've hinted to OS X that I want
the system to stay awake,
and I'm going to do my computation,
whether it takes a few
seconds or a few hours.
And when I'm done,
I'm going to call IOPM assertion release,
and that lets go of this
assertion I just created.
And it's very important to call
IOPM assertion release as soon
as you're done with your work,
because that lets OS X reevaluate system
sleep state and idle the system to sleep,
if appropriate.
So your app may hold
several assertions at once.
Realistically, you shouldn't hold more
than five or ten at a time,
but the upper limit is 1024.
[Transcript missing]
When you run Caffeinate,
it takes an assertion.
And when you kill Caffeinate,
it drops that assertion.
The way we're invoking it here is
we're passing it the argument Make.
Caffeinate is going to take
that argument and run Make,
and keep Make running,
and let Make run until it completes.
When Make exits, Caffeinate will exit,
and Caffeinate will drop
its power assertion.
So this could have been a
build that took two hours,
and Caffeinate held the Prevent User Idle
System Sleep assertion in that time.
Check out the man page for both
PMSET and Caffeinate for other options.
Some of you may already be aware of,
or may be using, the API IOCancel.com.
This is a way to prevent idle
sleep in OS X since 10.0.
But we are asking that you
move away from that and use
I/O power assertions instead.
Using I/O cancel power change and
I register for system power to call
I/O cancel power change doesn't give
us the same amount of accountability
for who's preventing sleep.
Just like disk I/O, it's kind of sloppy.
It doesn't let us detect exactly
when you're done doing work and
when we can go back to sleep.
So for those reasons,
please move on to power assertions if
you're using I/O cancel power change.
We are not deprecating this API,
cancel power change, right now,
but we probably will do
so in a future release.
That was power assertions.
Power assertions aren't
new in Mountainside.
They've been around since Lion.
But they are increasingly important
given things like the disk I/O no
longer keeping the system awake.
It's more important for you to tell us
what you intend for sleep and wake to do.
So next up, let's talk about dark wake.
Like I said, dark wake is a system
state between sleep,
where everything's off,
and between full wake,
where everything's on.
When you're in dark wake, the CPU is on,
the network is on, the disk is usable,
any USB buses, firewire,
thunderbolt buses,
and any devices hanging off of
them are powered and usable.
Also, DarkWake is Apple only.
We aren't exposing any APIs to
run in DarkWake or to access
DarkWake in Mountain Lion.
But I do want to talk about it,
and I want you to know what
DarkWake is and what it means
for your Macs because you
Because you may see it,
you may observe your software
running in dark wake.
Apple doesn't take any -- we don't take
any measures to keep your code stopped.
We don't turn off the
CPU scheduler while we're in
dark wake so your code could run.
But you may find yourself running in a
situation where the disk is -- I'm sorry,
the disk is available,
where the graphics aren't available
and the audio aren't available.
And because we aren't exposing
dark/wake to developers or even
to many Apple internal apps,
we've suppressed a lot of
system-wide notifications,
like sleep/wake notifications.
We don't deliver those
while we're in dark/wake.
And network reachability.
We don't expose a lot of network
reachability notifications or
state while we're in dark/wake.
So you should be aware that your
app could run in this situation.
And your app should handle it gracefully
if the network isn't available or if
you can't talk to the Windows server
or graphics or audio devices.
So we've had DarkWake
in some form since 10.6,
and we've been building
on it with every release.
Starting in 10.6,
we used DarkWake to keep your
system's network state up to date
while your computer was asleep.
And so your computer would be
asleep but wake up every 90 minutes
or so to refresh your DHCP lease,
to remind your local Bonjor
sleep proxy server that your
computer exists and is reachable,
and to tell iCloud and back to my
Mac that your computer is reachable.
Adding to that in Lion, in 10.7,
we added a -- we started
using Dark Wake to respond
to environmental changes.
That's plugging and
unplugging the AC power,
plugging in a new USB device.
So whereas in the past,
when you plugged in a USB mouse,
the system would wake up all the
way into full wake and stay awake.
Now what we do is we
wake up into dark wake,
recognize that USB mouse,
reconfigure the USB mouse bus,
and put the system back to
sleep as soon as possible.
And adding to that in Mountain Lion,
we have Power Nap.
This is now a user-visible feature in
Mountain Lion with a checkbox and energy
saver to turn it on and turn it off.
We're going to be using Dark Wake to
wake up every hour or so on battery
and on AC power and check your mail,
check for new iCal events,
check the App Store for
updates and system updates.
And to perform time machine
backups and spotlight indexes.
So that's Dark Wake.
Please keep in mind that your software
may very well run in one of these,
in a Dark Wake state,
and please handle that case gracefully.
So that was power assertions in DarkWake,
and I want to talk briefly about
some debugging tools that you can
use to understand what's going on.
I've got PMset on screen again.
[Transcript missing]
And we can see that the next day at
4:18 p.m., the system did a dark wake.
And this was a dark wake due to EHC1.
I know that EHC1 is the
PCI hardware code for the USB stack,
for the USB bus.
So this was probably me, the user,
plugging in a USB keyboard.
And the system woke up, recognized it,
and went back to sleep.
It goes back to sleep 19 seconds later.
Again, due to a clamshell sleep,
the lid is still closed,
but it's returning to
sleep from dark wake.
And a minute and a half after that,
the user opens the lid
and wakes the system.
And you can see that
the charge is 95% now,
the battery charge.
And the wake event is due to EC lid zero,
and I know that's the wake
up code for a lid wake.
And I truncated the log right here,
but the next sleep/wake event is
probably 2662 seconds later on.
So that's sleep and wake.
Let's look at what taking assertions
and releasing assertions looks
like in NPM set minus G log.
This sample shows PID163 network
browser taking a power assertion
for the reason for the name AirDrop,
and they used a very descriptive name
that tells us very concisely what the
network browser tool app was doing.
And it held that
assertion for 12 seconds.
So that was probably me copying this
very keynote presentation from one
computer to to another over airdrop.
Next,
we can see that PID 5681 address book,
address book source sync took a prevent
user idle system sleep assertion
for 22 seconds and then released it.
Yeah, they were probably syncing
address book data with iCloud.
So that's it for me.
Thank you very much.
And here's Soren Spies.
Good morning.
Thank you all for being here.
My name is Soren,
and I am an energy enthusiast.
And this morning we're going to
talk about energy for software.
First of all, I'm going to tell you a
little bit of Energy 101.
One slide, everything you need to know to
understand energy efficiency
and the power-time trade-off.
We're going to talk about the rationale,
why we care about software
and its energy efficiency.
And we have a good little home
economics example for energy versus
utility to kind of help you think
about your software and how can you
make your software more efficient.
You've got to have a slightly
different mindset when you are
optimizing for energy efficiency
versus time performance,
although they're related,
as you will see.
The last section of the talk
is principles and techniques
for debugging your software,
finding idle energy leaks,
and being as efficient
as you possibly can be.
So first of all, here's the Energy 101.
Energy is very simple.
Its power, in this case a 27-inch iMac,
not at full screen brightness,
draws 100 watts.
You run that for two hours.
[Transcript missing]
products, and we want your products
to also be efficient.
So we're going to talk about how
to make your software efficient.
So one thing you may
not have thought about,
you may realize that you put your
laptop to sleep when you're not
using it and when it's asleep,
it lasts a long time,
especially our standby machines.
The ratio, very roughly,
from being awake and idle
to asleep is about 10 to 1.
So you can leave your computer
sitting there for an hour or 10 hours,
and if it's asleep, 10 hours of battery
disappears as about one hour.
But what you may not realize
is that while you're running,
you're sitting there idle,
there's also a 10 to 1
ratio between full out GPU,
CPU,
everything is going crazy versus idle.
There's a big difference.
Again,
so from all the way like full idle to
totally asleep is like 100 to 1 ratio.
So you want to minimize your power
consumption when you are running,
especially when you're idle,
because that's what you
do most of the time.
Also, batteries are only so big,
so you can only expend them.
You can sort of -- you're
going to use up that energy,
you want to use it as coolly,
lowest temperature,
and as slowly as possible.
So there's sort of a tradeoff
between time and heat,
and then what value is
your software delivering?
So here's just a little
graphic to help explain.
First of all,
we want to make the energy last.
But even .1% CPU,
if you look in activity monitor,
you're like, oh,
my software is barely doing anything.
.1%. That's not going to help.
That's going to be a .1% CPU.
Depending on how it does it,
it can actually be significantly
elevating the power draw of the system,
and that can have a very negative
effect on your battery life.
It can easily cost even
an hour of battery life,
even though it looks so tiny.
I'll show you in a
minute why that happens.
So here's a graph.
This is showing sort of the all out,
like maxed out machine, full bore.
Batteries just like
disappears in like one hour.
Theoretically it's like a 7-hour battery,
but you go all out and
disappears in like one hour.
So here's a graph.
This is showing sort of the all out,
like maxed So...
that's not what we want.
Most users,
they kind of have this experience.
They're running a lot of apps,
they're busy doing stuff,
and their battery lasts, you know,
five to seven hours, right?
But ideally, if you're just, like,
sitting there, you're, like,
maybe running your word
processor or something,
you'd like to get, like,
maybe ten hours of
battery life if you could.
And so these bars all have the same area,
and as we reduce the power,
you can see the time jumps out.
And we're not reducing
the power very much,
but, man, did you see that?
We reduced it, like, two pixels,
and it's, like, getting way out there.
And this is what we're talking about,
is get your software so it's really
chill when it's not doing anything.
When it is doing stuff, great,
no problem, but when it's not,
get it really chill.
And let's figure out how do we eke out
these last few little bits of extra
battery life so that instead of saying,
well, I've got a bunch of apps running,
so I'm only going to get
four hours of battery life,
you say,
I've got a bunch of apps running,
but they're all really
good power citizens,
really good energy citizens.
And now I'm still getting a
lot of battery life as if I was
only running my word processor.
So this is going to
be a little diversion.
Bear with me.
It is going to help you
think about your software.
A microwave appliance,
very simple device,
basically does two things.
It can heat things, primarily food,
and it has a clock.
Turns out heating is about
1500 watts on the microwave.
And at least on my
somewhat older microwave,
it's not Energy Star labeled,
it takes three watts just
to operate the clock.
Now, the clock itself is not
consuming three watts.
It's the power supply for the clock
that's kind of radiating some heat.
Well, it's converting 120 volts to
whatever voltage the clock wants.
So let's think about, remember,
energy equals power times time.
So here, those green spikes are
the heating energy.
Let's say I heat up some
stuff three times a day.
I run it for about two minutes each.
And then,
but every single minute of the day,
that clock is running.
You see that down,
you barely see it along the bottom,
but there's just three
watts along the bottom.
So let's add up the energy.
Energy is power times time.
So here's a little kind of step graph.
This is just the heating energy, right?
So we have, each time we use it,
it bumps up.
You know, here, use it, okay,
that's great.
Use it again, okay, great.
Let's add in the clock, right?
You can see that over time,
that clock is slowly adding
to the energy consumption.
And it's actually, by the end of the day,
there's a significant, you know,
it's not just like a
little bit of energy,
it's a significant amount.
In fact,
500 to 1 ratio between the heating
energy and the clock energy,
or sorry, heating power and clock power.
It's only a 2 to 1 ratio between
heating energy and clock energy.
So this is a critical
thing to understand.
The things that you do
for short periods of time,
the power matters,
but the things that you do for
long periods of time have a
much larger impact on energy.
So we're going to talk about
how to achieve that in a moment.
For those of you who are
sort of math-oriented,
you can kind of see in my equation that
the 1500 watts and the 1400 minutes,
that's minutes in a day,
is about the same.
And then the 2 to 1 ratio comes
from the 6 minutes total of the
microwave versus the 3 watts.
So for your software,
think about what your user wants.
What are you doing for the user?
What are you delivering versus
any background activity costs?
Because if those background
activity costs are,
you know, 50% of the cost of your
software on the battery,
you can do better.
And we want to help you do better.
[Transcript missing]
You can also use Dtrace on the command
line to get some stacks from your system.
So this first example is I want
to know when are those get
time of day calls happening.
And you can say just focus on my
app and give me a user stack every
time get time of day gets called.
And you can go back and look
and say -- you can also set a
break point in the debugger and
see why is this getting called.
Then this is kind of
the big hammer weapon.
I don't know how much you Dtrace,
but you can basically say every
single function call I want
to know when it gets called.
And you'll get the information about
the function call getting called.
You can filter this down a little
bit once you get an idea of maybe
what the most frequent ones are.
But this will definitely determine
-- this is like the ultimate
determinant of is your app idle?
Is it running software or not?
Is it running code?
Are function calls getting called?
And we also have both system trace
and within system trace we have
the system call instrument that can
help you get back traces for these
things so you can figure out where
in your code this is happening.
This is happening.
[Transcript missing]
Peripherals in particular
are conservative.
They tend to power up and then
they kind of hang out for a
while and then they spin down.
And so ideally we want
to tell them we're done.
We're going to turn it off now.
So often there's API for this,
whether it's dropping an assertion
like Ethan mentioned or a close
or a release or a disable.
There are many different ways
for the different frameworks to
say I'm done with the camera.
I don't need the GPS anymore.
I have closed my networking connection.
All of those things you can proactively
kind of shut down and finish up with.
On iOS in particular there's
a UI kit background task
completion that times out.
Don't let it time out.
Release it when you are done so
that we can immediately go ahead
and put the system to sleep.
As Ethan mentioned,
we have both frameworks and iOS does
this extensively depending on which
framework calls are currently active.
It will hold assertions on your behalf.
OS X has a framework that
allows you to do that.
It has more direct
access to the assertions.
But you want to close those things,
release those assertions,
drop your references, et cetera,
so that we can go ahead and say, oh,
this software is done.
Let's go ahead and power down.
So the first thing to check is
first of all is your CPU still idle?
A lot of times you do some work and,
you know, idle, work,
and then you kind of don't
go all the way back because
you left some timers running.
You have some animations still on screen.
So exercise your code
and then analyze idle.
First do your idle
analysis when you launch.
But then also do a bunch
of automated tests,
run all your automated tests,
and then see am I still idle
or do I have stuff that's kind
of running in the background.
I often find that quitting and
restarting an app will cause
its CPU consumption to go down.
And I'm, oh, you know,
it's an opportunity for optimization.
GPU mux on OS X,
we have this two graphics processing
units on some of our blocks.
We have some of our portable products.
And the sort of the external one
versus the one that's built into the
motherboard chipset is more power hungry.
And so we will switch between these
depending on what you're doing.
But there's a developer
Q&A that makes sure that if
your process is using the GPU,
you do it wisely so that
when these switches happen,
you don't end up leaving
both of them powered on.
There's a particular break point here.
CGL bad application
not mux aware lockdown.
You can set that break point
and see if you get called.
But check out that Q&A.
Finally, iOS has a wonderful energy
diagnostic instrument.
This does not give you back traces,
but it does give you kind of a high
level view of is the GPS turned on?
Is the display bright?
Am I doing network activity?
And just kind of gives you a notion
of you can run your software,
you can see it kind of
light up the machine,
and then when you try to go back to idle,
you can see where you were successful.
Did the machine idle back down?
And you can also see how
long it took in some cases.
Maybe you didn't fully close things.
Maybe you let something time out
instead of actively closing it.
But it gives you a pretty
wide view of Bluetooth,
sleep/wake, et cetera, et cetera,
et cetera.
So that is a tool that you can use for
iOS particularly to see which parts
of the system you left turned on.
[Transcript missing]